[Music] Everyone, I'm Norman Widlberger. Today
we're going to look at arithmetic with multi-sets
via trees, so we're going to connect with
computer science. We have a novel way of
thinking about arithmetic where multi-sets are
the basic foundational objects, and basically,
we create everything just from boxes inside
boxes inside boxes. But now we're going to
have a more two-dimensional, perhaps somewhat
easier to visualize point of view towards them.
So here is an example of a pure m-set. We have
a lot of nested boxes: here's an empty set,
an empty set, or rather we should say empty m-set,
empty m-set. Here's a pair of empty m-sets in a
box. Here is a bunch of nested ones and also
the same repeated there. Now our notation is
that an empty m-set is denoted by zero, so we
could replace this with zero. This was zero,
then this will be the m-set 0 0. This will be the
m-set, that inner one there is replaced with zero,
so we have zero inside an m-set inside an
m-set. And this is the same as that one,
and then we could reduce that a little
bit further because this m-set here,
the m-set containing 0 and 0, is our
number two. And this m-set containing
just a single zero is the number one. So
these two can be replaced with these ones.
So this is a sort of alternate notation. This
is sort of the elemental point of view where we
just have m-sets. Here we're introducing natural
numbers also. So today we want to see how this
arithmetic translates into the world of trees and
what kind of trees are we talking about. So of
course a tree is a graph that is acyclic, doesn't
have any cycles in it, so there is a unique
sort of path from any one vertex to another
which doesn't repeat itself. And the trees
we're talking about are rooted trees, that means
they have a distinguished node, and we're going
to put that distinguished node at the top, so we
can also perhaps say this is like a roofed tree
with the root up at the top. Now importantly,
this is a little bit different from the rooted
trees that appeared in my series on solving
polynomial equations. If you've watched that, we
solved polynomial equations by introducing a broad
extension of the Catalan story, and trees played
an important role. But those were planar trees,
okay, so these are non-planar trees by which we
mean that the actual order on the page that we
put these sort of sub-branches is unimportant.
So let's have a look at this one here, okay,
it can be represented with this tree here. So
this top node represents the outside brackets,
and then inside that there are these sort of
subdivisions. There's an m-set, another m-set,
another m-set, another one, another one. So
there's these five sort of interior m-sets
that are corresponding to these nodes here,
which is one level down. So the lines here just
represent the inclusions of m-sets in m-sets. Now
these ones here are empty, so we're going to
denote them with just a node which is empty,
and this one here is represented here,
it has two empty ones inside it. This
one here has another one inside it, which then
contains an empty set, and this one is similar.
So this representation is not unique because we
can interchange the orders of things. So this is
an alternate representation where we've taken
these sort of two branches, if you like, um,
and brought them on the other side. I've brought
these to the other side. Okay, so these are equal.
Now in our connection with algebra, we've seen
that an m-set of this kind really corresponds
to an algebraic object, a relatively familiar
algebraic object. So this is the number two,
the two zeros here, and this two that's appearing
in the m-set corresponds to alpha zero squared,
where alpha zero is some kind of basic variable
that's introduced in the poly number context
here. And these two m-set ones that are appearing
inside here give us 2 alpha one corresponding to
a second variable alpha one. So we end up
with an algebra, not just in one variable,
but with an unbounded number of variables
corresponding to natural numbers. And so we want
to see today how this algebra, sort of polynomial
algebra, corresponds to the tree story and how the
tree representation sheds light and gives us new
ideas about the structure of this mathematics.
Now rooted or roofed trees are very important
objects in combinatorics, but they also play a
very important role in computer science, where
they're often used to store data structures in
convenient ways that allow for you nice search
and sorting and so on. So let's just review
some standard, probably familiar terminology
in the context of rooted or roofed trees. So
here's that same one that we had before, and so
that node up at the top will be called the root,
and it has the property that it doesn't have any
parents. So the relationship between a node like
this and a node directly below it is that of
parent and child. So the top one is the parent,
and the one below is the child, okay. And those
nodes which don't have any children, so they're
sort of at the bottom of some branch, are called
leaves. So a leaf has no children. And then
there's also this concept of height and depth. So
the height is the number of steps that you need to
go down to get to the furthest leaf below you. So
for example, if you're here, uh, you go down one
step. So this is at the height of one, this is
also at the height of one, this one here is also
at a height of one because that's the maximum that
you can go down to get to a leaf. There's another
corresponding concept which is depth. So it's
a let's say you're swimming in an ocean, okay,
you're inside the ocean, the height is how far you
are from the bottom of the sea floor, let's say,
and the depth is how far you are from the surface
of the water. Okay, so the depth is measured how
far we have to go up to get to the root. So the
root has depth zero and say these ones here are
of depth two, so we have to take one, two steps
to get to them from the root. Okay, so those just
some basic terminology from computer science.
So I should mention that this development of
arithmetic is somewhat new here, right? We don't
have a lot of experience with this yet, so perhaps
some of the things that I'm telling you are to
be thought of in a provisional fashion. We're
sort of exploring this territory. I wouldn't say
that anything is set in stone. We're still trying
to find the sort of optimal ways of structuring
this theory, and it's possible that I might make
some mistakes, so I hope that if I do, you will
correct me. And along the way, I'm going to try
to introduce perhaps some terminology or notation
which I hope will help us in this exploration.
That's what I want to do today. Here just
with this slide, I want to introduce a sort
of multiplicity convention that will make it
perhaps a little bit easier for us to display
things. So it's very easy to get overwhelmed with
all the brackets and such that we have. So here's
that same m-set that we were considering,
and we could write it out as a sum, okay,
because there are two of these, uh, these
ones here. And, um, and then we could,
um, write this one here, that's that one, and then
there are two of these guys here. So, um, we could
then, uh, sort of think about this in another
way by starting with the same big outside m-set
and representing these two empty m-sets in here
by a single m-set with a a little subscript two,
a left sub index, okay, so to the left and down.
And this here is telling us that there are two of
these guys in this bigger m-set. Similarly, this
one here, these guys here, there's two of them, so
we could also represent that with a two, okay. So
that's just a little convention that we could use,
especially useful if we have a lot of repetitions,
like if we're dealing with much bigger multiples,
that we don't want to physically exhibit, you
know, 300 different copies of the same thing,
much easier just to put a little 300 under there.
Note that we can also in fact go a little bit
further and actually replace this one also if we
wanted to, because we have two empty m-sets in
here, so we could rub off one of them and just
put a little two to the left of the other one.
So this corresponds in the tree world
also to a corresponding convention.
So here is our original a, and we could then maybe
represent this a little bit more efficiently by
saying, okay, look, there's two of these empty
m-sets coming from the root, okay, why don't we
just write one of them and put a little two
beside that node, also to the left and maybe
a little bit down, representing that this child
here is to be thought of just as one of a pair,
there's actually two of them. And here's another
pair of branches that are sort of the same. So
this is a subtree from here and from here, they're
the same, okay. So instead of writing both of them
out, we could just write one of them out and put
a little index there representing that there's
two of them, okay. That sort of corresponds to
that one there. And then we could actually also
go one step further. So if we did the rubbing
out here, then these two here that are out, uh,
coming from this one here, we can replace
them with a single one also with the two,
okay. So I just offer this as a potential
labor-saving device that will make it easier
for us to make expressions both in this m-set
point of view and also in this tree language.
So in my last video, I also introduced the idea
of counting, and there are different kinds of
counting functions, starting with zed, and then
we had an n counting function, a p counting
function, and m counting functions, sort of
corresponding to the different levels of zero
number, poly number, multi number, okay. So
they have a nice interpretation in this tree
language. So let's look at our example again.
There's our m-set a, they're written out in the
usual way here in the tree form. So the z counting
function is very simple, just takes any m-set and
sends it to zero, the empty m-set. n of a, which
is the closest to our regular counting function,
is this m-set, is the m-set of z of a's, set of
little a's where little a belongs to capital a.
So what we have to do is we have to take all of
the constituent elements, that one, that one,
that one, that one, and that one, and replace
them all with empty sets or empty m-sets. So
there they are, they're an empty m-set, the
same as zero. So similarly, we just say that
we're replacing each of them with zero, and
then the resulting m z is the number five.
And what we're doing there in terms of the
diagram, you can see, has a very natural,
simple sort of representation. What we're doing
first of all with z of a is we're just looking
at the top of it, okay, the top of it, and there's
a single node there, and so that's the zero node.
And when we, so that's sort of like zed. And then
when we go to n of a, what we're doing is we're
just going down one level, to the level one, or
maybe we can say to the depth one. That means
we're sort of chopping it off there and looking
at everything above that, okay. So if we just
chop the whole thing there, then we get a much
simpler m-set which just has five leaves coming
out of the root, and that's then the number five.
So that corresponds to the counting function n.
And what about p of a? Well, that's defined to be
the m-set n of a where a is in a. And so there,
what we have to do is we have to look at in each
one of these and replace each one of them with,
uh, the n of them. So the n of this is, is zero,
and if this is zero, so we're just putting those
zeros. n of this, well, to do that, we have to
replace all the things inside it with, with zeros,
okay. So just get zero zero, but this one here, we
have to replace this, the thing that's inside here
with a zero. So instead of having a three nested
brackets, we end up only with two nested brackets.
So this one and this one end up simplifying
to m-set zero and m-set zero. And what that
amounts to is truncating the story at that level.
So we're going down to depth two but no further,
okay. So that's, that's our p counting function.
So the p counting function looks at everything
above that. It says p of the m-set is just
what you get when you truncate right there,
the thing above it is p of a. So that's a very
attractive way of counting, and of course it's
obvious how to extend that to further depths or
further levels. In this case, m of a, well that's
the m-set of p of a's, a in a. That turns out
to be all of a in this case, and that sort of
corresponds to chopping off at that level there.
So that's the m, and since this thing here is
a multi-number, okay, because it's,
um, it's an m-set of poly numbers,
so the m counting function actually just outputs,
uh, the, the m-set itself. So the general rule
here that we're seeing is that in this world
at the level of trees, sort of geometrically,
these various counting functions just correspond
to truncations. And that makes arguments
about the sort of functorial properties that
the counting functions have with respect to
the operations a lot easier to, to sort of see,
because we just have to ask them what happens if
you, if we look at addition or multiplication
to you up to a certain level, okay. So that's
a nice aspect of the two-dimensional visual
approach that we get with the tree point of view.
I want to introduce another idea which I think
is useful here, the idea of taking a box,
which might have stuff inside it, and sort of
closing the lid so that you can no longer look
inside and see what it has in it. Maybe you can
shake it, you know, but now we're just sort of
thinking about a box which may have stuff inside
it, but that content is maybe not visible to us.
So I want to talk about the idea of closed
boxes or correspondingly closed nodes in
the tree version. So here again is our familiar
a, okay, there's a sort of more succinct way of
representing it. Here's another way of thinking
about what a is sort of geometrically, which is
really more in the line of boxes. So here the
boxes are represented by rectangles. So there's
the big rectangle which corresponds to that one
up here, and then these five here are the five
elements of a which themselves are rectangles or
squares. And these ones here are empty, and this
one here has two boxes inside it which otherwise
are empty. And these ones here both have a box
inside, but that box is not empty, it rather has
another box inside both of them. So this is also
a very attractive way of thinking about things,
also has a bit more of a two-dimensional aspect.
So what we want to think about now is another
way of sort of condensing this kind of thing,
because in principle, these things could be
very big, right? We don't want to be writing
these trees down if we really need to in all
their messy details, especially if they have
lots of branches with a lot of depth. So we
could maybe represent this thing in a bit a
more succinct way by replacing one of these nodes
with just a letter representing the contents,
representing that box and its contents. So for
example, let's consider this one here. So when we
look at this node here, okay, I want you to think
about this note as not really so much a node,
but actually as a sub-tree. So I want you to think
about this thing here as representing the tree
that's emanating from that point. In other words,
the tree that has that as a root, okay. So that's
that one along with two edges and these two, two
down here. So that's like a little sub-tree, okay,
in fact, there it is. There, and you can sort of
see that's what's called b. So what we can do is
in this diagram here we can replace this sub-tree
with just a single node which is the root of it,
and we put a little, say, box around it, okay,
and letter b, telling us that what we've done is
we've made a substitution or we've sort of rubbed
some stuff out, and this is then a placeholder for
some additional stuff which is perhaps off the
page or is recorded in memory somewhere else,
okay. So in this case here, we see there's a
little square around it, meaning there's actually
more stuff, there's another tree coming from that
node, but we have to find it somewhere else. And
so we look over here, okay, here's b, so then
we could recover this by putting that back in.
Similarly, this one here, that node there
is replaced with a little square around it,
and we forget about the stuff below, and the
letter c, you know, so this is representing this
sort of sub-tree, node, node, and a leaf there.
So this is a more efficient way of representing
this thing that sort of compresses some of the
information perhaps that we don't really need.
Now there's a corresponding way of thinking about
that over here, in the sense of what we're doing
is we're sort of closing the boxes, okay, but
recording the contents of the box somewhere else.
So corresponding to what I did over here, this
b one over here is this one here. So going from
this diagram to this diagram, what I've done is
I've sort of shaded the box so you no longer can
see inside. There's something inside, perhaps it
doesn't have to be, but there could be something
inside, but we don't know what it is. But over
here in different locations, we see that actually
this box is actually this one here. And similarly
this box c which has also been shaded so we lose
the information, but it's over here somewhere,
okay. So this is a way that if we're doing certain
manipulations and we don't actually need to know
what the sort of finer structure is inside these
boxes inside other boxes, okay, we might be
making a calculation that only requires us to
look at things down to a certain depth, and what's
below that is sort of irrelevant for the actual
computation we're interested in. So this kind of
representation or simplification, I think, can be
helpful in that kind of context. You see there's
a natural parallel between what we're doing here
in the tree world and what we're doing here in
the more familiar sort of m-set or box world.
Okay, so now let's get to the arithmetic with
trees, and I'm just going to give you this
one slide which has a lot of information and some
computations, and I'm going to go through it and I
hope that you can check and see that I've done it
correctly. So I have to admit here that, you know,
I'm not that familiar with this entire world.
I'm sort of just making the initial forays into
it myself, and I have to admit that I often get a
little bit confused making these calculations. We
just have to where exactly are we, you know, and
what level are we, etc. So if I feel a little bit
like perhaps an intelligent but primitive
person who has never been to school might
feel when they're subjected to primary school
mathematics and they have to learn arithmetic
for the first time, it's not that hard, but, you
know, there's these various conventions and you
have to do quite a lot of practice actually before
you get reasonably good at it. After all, in
primary school we spend some years learning basic
arithmetic, addition, subtraction, multiplication,
etc. Even with just natural numbers, so
there's a fair amount to learn there. But it
is admittedly of an elementary nature, but still
the unfamiliarity of it probably does require some
practice. So actually in that direction while I'm
talking about that, maybe I could ask some of my
viewers to think about, if you're interested in
this topic, of creating some resources that will
help us to sort of gain some experience in this
world. So I think it would be nice to have some
problem sets like little homework exercises that
we could do, maybe with solutions which have been
carefully worked out so that we can see whether
our intuition is a good one. Okay, so here's an
example of such a thing. So here are two m-sets,
a and b, represented in tree form. Okay, so here's
the root, we have three children, one of them is a
leaf, the other two have some branches, that's of
depth two, and that's one that's depth three. So
in terms of our familiar sort of algebra notation,
this corresponds to an algebraic expression in our
variables, well, in numbers and variables. Okay,
in this case, 1 plus alpha 0 plus alpha 1. The
one corresponds to that leaf down there, okay,
so that's just a single zero inside the big
m-set, that corresponds to the number one.
This thing here, it's like an m-set inside the
big m-set, there's an m-set which has a single
zero in it, so that's like this. This combination
here is one, but it's inside the bigger m-set,
so it has the interpretation of alpha zero. And
when we go one more, so when we have an m-set
inside an m-set with a zero in it, then that's
alpha one. Over here, b, we have another one,
so there's the root and there's a leaf coming
down there, and here's a node which has two
leaves coming out here. So this thing here by
itself is the number two, but when the number two
is appearing as, you know, down from the root,
it has to be interpreted in a different way,
okay. That's like the number two in an m-set,
that's different from the number two. So that
has the interpretation of being alpha zero squared
in terms of this fundamental variable, the zeroth
variable, alpha zero. So this is 1 plus alpha
zero squared, that's an interpretation of that.
Okay, so here are the various operations that we
know so far how to do, and so the simplest one
is of course addition, where we just take these
things and add them. And what we're doing there,
one way of thinking about it is we're just, we're
just sort of chopping these things off here,
and then taking these, the constituent
entries, which are themselves little trees,
okay, and we're just putting them all together.
So this tree right here gets copied, that's a new
element of this, this new m-set, okay, this one
here gets copied, and this one here gets copied.
Similarly, this one gets copied and this one here
gets copied. Okay, so you could think about it
perhaps as a sort of way we're sort of snipping or
cutting those edges there, and cutting those edges
there, and taking those five edges and putting
them together within a new node. That's the tree
version of taking the contents of these two m-sets
and dumping them out into into another box, okay.
A times B, this is a times B, and how do we
get that? Well, what we have to do is we have
to look at the elements of a. So there are three
elements of a, each of them is themselves a tree,
and there are two elements of b, each of them is
itself a tree, and we have to take all possible
combinations of elements of a and elements of b,
like pairs, maybe that tree and that tree, and we
have to add them, they're m-sets so they can be
added. So for example, when we do that, we take
this thing here which is really like the m-set
which is what we're calling one, and this is the
m-set zero, and we add one and zero, we get one,
okay. So the effect of adding this and this is
just to get this, so that's why that's appearing
over there. And similarly, this plus this tree is,
it's this one here, and this one plus this is also
this one here, okay. So now the next three are
obtained by taking these three and adding this one
to it, okay. So for example, if we take this tree
here, and we take this tree here, and we add them.
So this is a tree with one leaf, this is a tree
with two leaves, we add them, we get a tree with
three leaves. When we add this one and this one,
we get a tree that has a root there, and then it
has this sub-tree coming down, and also two leaves
coming out. And finally, when we add this to this,
well this is zero again, so we're just getting our
thing that we started with there. So this
is a times b, and what is it algebraically?
Well, sort of read through things, this one here
is one, okay, and this one here is a one but it's
contained in a big bracket so that's alpha
zero. This is alpha one. This one here is,
okay, this one here is maybe the next simplest
one. This one here is alpha zero squared,
okay. This one here is alpha zero cubed,
and this one here is a combination of
alpha zeros. There's two, sort of two
of them, so alpha zero squared there,
but there's also an alpha one, so it corresponds
to this polynomial in alpha zero and alpha one.
And what about a caret b? Okay, so we're going
to change our notation just a little bit. I was
talking about exponentiation, maybe that's not
really such a great terminology. A number of
viewers have suggested that, and I think that's
reasonable, but I sort of like this symbol,
so I'm going to stick with a suggestion that
a viewer made, that we stick with this thing
here and call it the caret, c-a-r-e-t, okay.
So a caret b, what is that? So by definition,
what we have to do is we have to take these things
here and take the various sub-trees, the elements
of this one, the elements of this one, and we have
to pairwise multiply them, multiply them, not add.
Over here we were adding them, here we have to
multiply them. So for example, we have to take
this sub-tree and multiply it by this sub-tree,
okay. But this sub-tree is zero, when we multiply
something by zero, we get zero. So we get a zero,
zero, zero. The first three are going to be zeros,
in fact we're going to get another zero because,
because when we multiply this one by this one
here, we also get a zero. So the two that are
non-trivial are the product of this and this,
which is this and this and this. So let's just
check that. So the product of this tree and
this tree, how do you take the product? Well,
you have to look at all possible pairs of sub,
or elements. This one has one element, this one
has two elements, so we have to take a pair like
this and we have to add them, all right. So zero
plus zero is zero, zero plus zero, zero. So we're
getting two possible zeros, and when we do the
same thing over here, we have to take this tree,
okay, starting from there, and this tree, and we
have to multiply them. So how do we do that? Well,
we have to take the elements of this one, there's
only one element, namely the tree starting there,
and there's two elements of this one, and we
have to add those, okay. So when we add this one
with this one, well, we just get this thing, and
when we add it with this one, we get this thing
because zero plus anything is the anything,
all right. So that's what we end up getting
by taking this combination with this combination,
multiplying, multiplying this tree with this tree.
And what does this look like
algebraically? Well, this is a four,
this is alpha zero squared, same thing like that.
And this thing here is, well, uh, this was like an
alpha, alpha one, and we have two of them coming
out here, so that's like alpha one squared. So
that's the way the caret operation works on these
things, which is, you know, a little bit strange
to us. Admittedly, this is a kind of a strange new
arithmetic. We're in a kind of unusual world here.
So the natural question though
is, is this a consistent world,
and is it an interesting world? Well, if we just
restrict ourselves to addition and multiplication,
it's certainly useful because we're
recovering polynomial algebra in
actually an unbounded number of variables.
That's already a very rich discipline,
and in fact in our next video, we're going
to see that this becomes even much richer
when we take the big step to extending our number
system to include negative numbers. So a lot of
viewers have asked me how are we going to do that,
and it's a really interesting question, and I'm
going to show you next time. And we're going to
see that that really again expands our vision in
quite a fascinating way. Hope you'll join me for
that. I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]